JOHN COTTINGHAM
On
the Meaning of Life

First published 2003
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
© 2003 John Cottingham
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical,
or other means, now known or hereafter invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN 0–415–24799–3 (hbk)
ISBN 0–415–24800–0 (pbk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-16424-5 Master e-book ISBN
ISBN 0-203-25838-X (Adobe eReader Format)

Preface
ix
The QuestionOne
1
The Question that Won’t Go Away1
Science and Meaning4
Something Rather than Nothing7
A Religious Question?9
Meaning after God11
Man, the Measure of All Things?16
Variety, Meaning and Evaluation18
What Meaningfulness Implies21
Meaning and Morality24
Humanity and Openness28
The Barrier to MeaningTwo
32
The Void32
The Challenge of Modernity36
The Shadow of Darwin39
Science, Religion and Meaning44
Evolution and ‘Blind’ Forces47
The ‘Nastiness’ of the Evolutionary Mechanism49
Matter and Surplus Suffering53
The Character of the Cosmos58
Meaning, Vulnerability and HopeThree
64
Morality and Achievement64
Futility and Fragility67
Religion and the Buoyancy of the Good73

Vulnerability and Finitude76
Spirituality and Inner Change79
Doctrine and Praxis86
From Praxis to Faith92
Coda: Intimations of Meaning99
Notes
105
Index
121
viii
Contents

The Question
One
‘Alright’, said Deep Thought. ‘The Answer to the Great Question . . .’
‘Yes!’
‘Of Life the Universe and Everything . . .’ said Deep Thought.
‘Yes!’
‘Is . . .’ said Deep Thought, and paused.
‘Yes!’
‘Is . . .’
‘Yes . . . !!! . . . ?’
‘Forty-two’, said Deep Thought, with infinite majesty and calm . . .
It was a long time before anyone spoke.
‘Forty-two!’ yelled Loonquawl. ‘Is that all you’ve got to show for seven
and a half million years’ work?’
‘I checked it very thoroughly,’ said the computer . . . ‘I think the
problem, to be quite honest with you, is that you’ve never actually known
what the question is.’
‘But it was the Great Question! The Ultimate Question of Life, the
Universe and Everything’ howled Loonquawl.
‘Yes’, said Deep Thought with the air of one who suffers fools gladly,
‘but what actually is it?’
A slow stupefied silence crept over the men as they stared at the
computer and then at each other.
‘Well, you know, it’s just Everything . . . Everything . . .’ offered
Phouchg weakly.
Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
1
THE QUESTION THAT WON’T GO AWAY
Not all important-sounding questions make sense. For a fair
part of the twentieth century it was common in much of the
anglophone  world  to  dismiss  many  of  the  traditional  grand
1

On
 the Meaning of Life

questions  of  philosophy  as  pseudo-questions.  People  who
felt  perplexed  by  the  ancient  puzzle  of  the  meaning  of  life
were firmly  reminded  that  meaning  was  a  notion  properly
confined  to  the  arena  of  language:  words  or  sentences  or
propositions could be said to have meaning, but not objects
or events in the world, like the lives of trees, or lobsters, or
humans. So the very idea that philosophy could inquire into
the meaning of life was taken as a sign of conceptual confu-
sion.  The  solution  to  the  problem,  as  Ludwig  Wittgenstein
once remarked, would lie in its disappearance.
2
But somehow the problem does not go away; the search for
life’s meaning, confused or not, retains as powerful a hold on
us  as  ever.  The  characters  in  Douglas  Adams’  Hitchhiker  saga
may  seem  absurd  in  their  faith  that  a  supercomputer  could
wrap  it  up  for  them,  and  hopelessly  vague  about  how  to
formulate  the  problem  in  the first  place,  but  a  strong  sense
remains that the ancient quest that has held so many in thrall
is more than just a philosopher’s muddle.
For  our  human  existence  is  mysterious  –  something
strange,  frightening,  to  be  wondered  at.  Philosophy,  said
Aristotle, is the child of wonder;
3
 and the capacity to be dis-
turbed by what is ordinarily taken for granted is the hallmark
of  that  questioning  spirit  that  is  inseparable  from  human
nature itself. The human being is unique in that, as Heidegger
put  it,  it  is  an  entity  for  whom  its  own  being  is  an  issue.  Or
again: ‘Man alone of all beings, when addressed by the voice of
Being, experiences the marvel of all marvels: that what-is is.’
4
What are we really asking when we ask about the meaning
of life? Partly, it seems, we are asking about our relationship
with the rest of the universe – who we are and how we came
to be here. One aspect of this is a scientific question about our
origins.  To  which  the  answer,  only  recently  discovered,  is
2

On
 the Meaning of Life

breathtaking:  we  came  from  the  stars.  If  we  manage  (the
experience  is  rarer  and  harder  now)  to find  a  spot  far  away
from the city, where no seepage of noise and dazzle pollutes
the night, and look up in wonder at the vast and silent black-
ness of space from which numberless brilliant points of light
shine down upon us, then what we see is the same material
from  which  we,  and  everything  else  on  this  fragile  planet,
were  once  formed.  We  humans  are  part  of  the  cosmos:  not
just as a pebble is part of a miscellaneous heap, not just as an
item on a haphazard inventory that happens to include what-
ever the universe contains; but truly one with it, sharing its
common origin, built of its stuff. We are formed of stardust.
Of it, yet alienated from it? It may be so. The ancient Stoics
thought  that  our  human  rationality  was  a  microcosm  of  a
governing principle of Reason, the spiritual substance pervad-
ing  the  whole  cosmos;  centuries  later,  the  rationalist  phil-
osopher Leibniz declared that ‘there is nothing waste, nothing
sterile, nothing dead in the universe’.
5
 But the dominant view
nowadays is that life and rationality are, cosmically speaking,
local and untypical features of reality: nature is predominantly
blind, irrational, dead. As the poet A. E. Housman lamented:
. . . nature, heartless, witness nature,
Will neither care nor know
What stranger’s feet may cross the meadow
And trespass there, and go.
Nor ask amid the dews of morning
If they are mine, or no.
6
We  humans  may  pride  ourselves  on  our  intellectual  and
cultural achievements, but against the backdrop of unimagin-
able  aeons  of  time  through  which  clouds  of  incandescent
hydrogen expand without limit, we are a strange temporary
3

The Question

accident,  no  more  significant  than  a  slime  or  mould  that
forms  for  a  few  years  or  decades  on  a  barren  rockface  and
then is seen no more.
Assessments  of  this  kind  may  seem  linked  to  a  modern
scientific  understanding  of  our  origins,  but  in  an  important
sense they plainly go beyond science: they do not just report
the ‘facts’,  but  talk  about  what  those  supposed  facts  ‘mean’
for us, for our sense of ourselves and our self-worth. And it is
hard  to  see  how  such  judgements  about  the  significance  of
our  lives  can  be  established  by  scientific  inquiry  alone.  To
quote  Wittgenstein  again,  this  time  sounding  rather  more
hospitable  to  our  grand  question,  ‘we  feel  that  even  when
all  possible  scientific  problems  have  been  answered,  the
problems  of  life  have  not  been  put  to  rest’.
7
  Why  exactly
should this be so?
SCIENCE AND MEANING
Science  has  advanced  so  spectacularly  and  with  such  an
accelerated  pace  in  the  last  century  or  so  that  we  may  be
tempted  to  suppose  that  given  a  bit  longer  it  could  even
succeed  in  explaining  why  we  are  here  and  what  our  exist-
ence means. This appears to be the view of one of our most
distinguished contemporary scientists, Stephen Hawking:
Up to now, most scientists have been too occupied with the
development of new theories that describe 
what the universe
is to ask the question 
why . . . However, if we discover a
complete [and unified] theory [combining quantum physics
with general relativity] . . . we shall all . . . be able to take part
in the discussion of the question of why it is that we and the
universe exist. If we find the answer to that, it would be the
ultimate triumph of human reason . . .
8
4

On
 the Meaning of Life

The distinction between what something is and why it is has
become something of a cliché; in similar vein, people often
say science tackles how questions but not why questions. But in
fact  the  distinction  is  not  particularly  helpful  in  sorting  out
what scientists characteristically do. Aristotle was rather more
perspicuous in distinguishing four types of answer relevant to
scientific inquiry:
(1)  Answers indicating the component materials of which an
object is made (its ‘material’ cause);
(2)  Answers specifying the essence or kind of thing it is (its
‘formal’ cause);
(3)  Answers pointing to the motive force that got it into its
present state (its ‘efficient’ cause); and
(4)  Answers  citing  the  end  or  goal  towards  which  it  tends
(its ‘final’ cause).
9
Explanations of all four kinds can be good scientific answers
to the question ‘why?’
(1)  ‘Why was the bridge strong?’ ‘Because [material] it was
made of steel.’
(2)  ‘Why  do  you  classify  that  ice  cube  as  water?’ ‘Because
[formal] it is frozen H
2
O.’
(3)  ‘Why  did  the  billiard  ball  move?’ ‘Because  [efficient]  it
was struck with a cue.’
(4)  ‘Why  do  trees  have  roots?’ ‘Because  [final]  in  order  to
grow they need to take up water and nutrients.’
The  last  type  of  answer  was  particularly  important  in
Aristotle’s  work,  since  he  maintained  that  all  things  tend
towards   some   natural   end-state;   but   although   modern
scientists, especially biologists, still frequently use such goal-
related or teleological explanations of phenomena, it has been
5

The Question

a  guiding  principle  since  the  seventeenth  century  that  such
teleology  must  always  eventually  be  explained  in  terms  of
underlying microstructures of an entirely mechanical nature.
It   is   in   this   sense   that   the   great   seventeenth-century
philosopher-scientist  René  Descartes  is  often  said  to  have
banished teleology from science. He envisaged a unified style
of  explanation  based  ultimately  on  the  universal  laws  of
mathematical  physics  that  governed  the  behaviour  of  all
natural  phenomena,  celestial  and  terrestrial  alike.  There  was
no  room  for  any  irreducible  purposiveness  or  goal-seeking
deep down in nature. The job of the scientist was to subsume
all observable events under the relevant mathematical cover-
ing laws; and in respect of these ultimate laws there was no
attainable answer to the question ‘why?’ One could say – and
Descartes did say – that God had decreed that it should be so;
but he immediately added that the rationale for God’s decrees
was  not  for  human  scientists  to  discover:  it  was  ‘forever
locked  up  in  the  inscrutable  abyss  of  His  wisdom’.
10
  David
Hume,  writing  a  century  after  Descartes,  took  an  essentially
parallel line, though couched in entirely secular language: the
job of science was to map the observable natural world, but
any supposed ‘ultimate springs and principles’ of nature were
beyond human power to fathom.
11
Although  this  position  was first  established  by  the  philo-
sophers  of  the  Enlightenment,  it  has  remained  pretty  much
unshaken ever since; for it is hard to see how science, however
it  may  develop,  could  address  such  ‘ultimate’  questions.  So
although  modern  scientists  may  often  ask  various  kinds  of
‘why?’  questions  about  particular  structures  or  events,  the
ultimate  and  most  general  principles  taken  to  underlie  all
phenomena  are  not  regarded  as  admitting  of  the  question
‘why is it so?’ If we were to achieve a complete and unified
6

On
 the Meaning of Life

theory  of  the  universe  (fulfilling  the  grand  philosophical-
cum-scientific vision that links Descartes and Hume, Newton
and  Einstein,  right  down  to  present-day  cosmologists  such
as  Hawking),  such  a  theory  would  subsume  all  observable
phenomena in the universe under the fewest and most com-
prehensive  laws  or  principles;  but  as  to  why  these  principles
obtain, this would have to remain, in Hume’s graphic phrase,
‘totally shut up from human curiosity and inquiry’.
12
So we have a problem about the modern hope for a grand
comprehensive physics that would be the ‘ultimate triumph
of human reason’. It is an inspiring aim, but one which leaves
it very unclear why it should be supposed that a super-theory
linking gravity and quantum physics might enable us to tackle
the ultimate question of ‘why it is that we and the universe
exist’.  It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  such  a  unified  theory
might turn out to be the only possible theory, in view of the
severe  constraints  that  must  govern  any  model  that  is  to  be
consistent and capable accounting for the universe as we find
it.  But  even  if  there  were  to  be  only  one  such  candidate,  it
would  still  be  merely  the  only  possible  theory  given  that  the
universe is as it is – which would still fall short of explaining
why  there  should  be  a  universe  at  all.  Some  cosmologists
(including Hawking) have speculated that the grand unified
theory ‘might be so compelling that it brings about its own
existence’;
13
  but  it  is  hard  to  take  this  seriously.  A  theory
cannot generate a universe.
SOMETHING RATHER THAN NOTHING
The  position  we  have  reached  is  that  while  science  aims  to
provide  as  complete  and  comprehensive  a  description  as  it
can of the universe, no matter how successful and unified the
theory it ends up with, it cannot explain why there should be
7

The Question

a universe there to be explained. We collide with the ancient
philosophical question ‘Why is there something rather than
nothing?’ and it seems clear on reflection that nothing within
the observable universe could really answer this. If there is a
solution to the ‘riddle of life in space and time’, it would have
to  lie  outside  space  and  time.
14
  Here  we  run  into  another
blank wall: if any such solution must lie beyond the limits of
the  temporal  and  spatial  universe,  outside  the  ‘phenomenal
world’, as Immanuel Kant called it, then may it not be beyond
the horizon of what is humanly knowable? If there is a tran-
scendent  realm  of  the  ‘noumenal’ –  something  beyond  the
phenomena,  which  explains  why  we  and  the  universe  are
here – then there is a risk that there will be nothing whatever
we can coherently say about it.
We may have reached the limits of science here, but perhaps
we  have  not  necessarily  reached  the  limits  of  human  dis-
course. There is a rich tradition of religious language, both in
our Western culture and elsewhere, that grapples with the task
of addressing what cannot be fully captured by even the most
complete  scientific  account  of  the  phenomenal  world.  One
might say that it is the task of religious discourse to strain at
the limits of the sayable. Some kinds of theology, to be sure,
have  aimed  at  keeping  entirely  within  the  boundaries  of
observable  evidence  and  rational  demonstration,  invoking
God  as  an  explanatory  hypothesis  to  account  for  certain
aspects of reality (such as order, design, motion, and so on),
rather in the manner of a scientist looking for the best explan-
ation of the data. That enduring strand of natural theology has
appealed to many philosophers over the centuries, though it
has suffered serious erosion in modern age from the success
of rival non-theistic explanations of the relevant phenomena
(in particular the triumph of Darwinism). But alongside this
8

On
 the Meaning of Life

quasi-scientific strand in theology, there is also a vast range of
religious  language  that  invokes  symbol,  metaphor,  poetry,
narrative,  and  other  elements  valued  for  their  supposed
revelatory  power  rather  than  for  their  strict  demonstrative
force;  religious  discourse  is  here  aimed  at  addressing  what
cannot fully be put into words, at least into the words of our
rational  scientific  culture,  but  which  can  still  somehow  be
shown, disclosed, made manifest.
15
Such   religious   discourse   gropes   towards   something
beyond the phenomenal world that may give meaning to the
universe, and to our human lives. It may not provide a rational
scientific solution to the old puzzle of why there is something
rather  than  nothing,  for,  as  we  have  seen,  this  is  a  question
which  may  lie  beyond  the  limits  of  systematic  knowledge.
But its advocates would urge that it none the less assuages the
vertigo, the ‘nausea’, as Jean-Paul Sartre called it, that we feel
in confronting the blank mystery of existence. The religious
answer  –  one  of  several  responses  to  the  problem  of  life’s
meaning  to  be  examined  in  the  pages  that  follow  –  aims  to
locate  our  lives  in  a  context  that  will  provide  them  with
significance  and  value.  Instead  of  our  feeling  thrown  into  a
arbitrary  alien  world  where  nothing  ultimately  matters,  it
offers the hope that we can find a home.
16
A RELIGIOUS QUESTION?
Religion  is  clearly  one  way  in  which  humans  have  found  a
meaning  and  purpose  to  their  lives.  But  is  it  the  only  way?
Albert  Einstein  asserted  bluntly  that  ‘to  know  an  answer  to
the question “What is the meaning of human life?” means to
be  religious’.
17
  That  other  giant  of  the  twentieth  century,
Sigmund  Freud,  also  insisted  that  ‘the  idea  of  life  having  a
purpose  stands  and  falls  with  the  religious  system’.
18
  Yet  of
9

The Question

course it by no means automatically follows from this linkage
that  the  religious  stance  is  therefore  something  to  be  advo-
cated. Freud himself regarded the solution offered by religion
as  pandering  to  something  unhealthy  and  disordered  in  the
human psyche:
The moment a man questions the meaning and value of life,
he is sick . . . By asking this question one is merely admitting
to a store of unsatisfied libido to which something else must
have happened, a kind of fermentation leading to sadness and
depression.
19
Belief  in  God,  according  to  Freud’s  view  in  Civilisation  and  its
Discontents,  is  based  on  an  infantile  response:  the  terrifying
‘feeling  of  helplessness’  in  childhood  aroused  the  ‘need
for  protection’  –  for  protection  through  love  –  which  was
provided by the father; and the recognition that this helpless-
ness  lasts  throughout  life  made  it  necessary  to  cling  to  the
existence of a Father, but this time a more powerful one.
20
This  Freudian  diagnosis  has  been  highly  influential,  and
can  often  be  seen  as  informing  the  idea,  voiced  by  many
contemporary  atheists,  that  God  is  merely  a  projection
formed in response to our human insecurities. But there are at
least two problems with this way of dismissing the religious
impulse. First, though the abject helplessness of the infant is
an apt image of the fragility of the human plight, that fragility,
as  Freud’s  own  analysis  confirms,  is  clearly  not  confined  to
infancy.  Our  vulnerability,  and  that  of  our  loved  ones,  to
death,  disease  and  accident  is  an  inescapable  part  of  the
human  condition;  and  this  being  so,  to  be  appropriately
aware  of  it  seems  precisely  what  a  normal  rational  human
ought to be (even granted that constantly dwelling on it may be
a  sign  of  neurosis).
21
  In  the  second  place,  talk  of  God  as  a
10

On
 the Meaning of Life

projection  does  not  in  the  end  advance  the  debate  between
theists  and  atheists  very  much,  since  it  cannot  settle  the
question  of  whether  the  impulse  to  project  our  longings
outwards  to  an  external  source  does  or  does  not  have  an
objective  counterpart.  It  is  certainly  plausible  that  frail  and
insecure humans would want to project their need for secur-
ity onto a protective heavenly Father; but a religious believer
can equally maintain that since our true destiny lies in union
with  our  creator,  we  will  naturally  feel  insecure  and  restless
until  we find  Him.  Indeed,  precisely  this  latter  theme  turns
out to be the refrain of many ancient writers on theistic spiri-
tuality: nata  est  anima  ad  percipiendum  bonum  infinitum,  quod  Deus  est;
ideo in eo solo debet quiescere et eo frui – ‘the soul is born to perceive
the infinite good that is God, and accordingly it must find its
rest and contentment in Him alone’.
22
 The result of the debate
over projection is thus a stand-off: the fact that humans feel
a  powerful  need  for  God’s  loving  protection  logically  says
nothing either way about whether that protection is a reality.
For the sake of this phase of the argument, however, let us
assume for the moment that there is no such divine reality –
no objective correlative that could ground our search for life’s
significance.  Would  human  life,  in  that  case,  be  empty  and
pointless?  If  God  is  dead,  one  of  Dostoevsky’s  characters
famously declares, everything is permitted;
23
 in similar vein,
if there is no God, would everything be meaningless?
MEANING AFTER GOD
Depression,  so  say  the  experts,  is  of  two  kinds,  exogenous
and endogenous: it can either be triggered by some painful
external circumstance, like job loss or bereavement, or it can
be apparently spontaneous, presenting as an internal malaise
for which there is no immediate outside cause. In a somewhat
11

The Question

analogous  way,  perhaps,  it  seems  that  meaning  might  be
either exogenous or endogenous: someone might find their
life  meaningful  in  so  far  as  it  conformed  to  the  will  of  a
transcendent Creator ‘out there’ who was the ultimate source
of value and significance; but they might instead find mean-
ing ‘within’,  as  it  were,  constructing  it  from  the  inside  as  a
function  of  their  own  choices  and  commitments.  Friedrich
Nietzsche,  famous  for  his  announcement  of  the  ‘death  of
God’,  was  clear  that  humankind,  in  the  post-theistic  world,
would have to generate significance from within itself – and
indeed  that  this  was  the  only  available  source  for  all  value:
‘Ultimately man finds in things nothing but what he himself
has  imported  into  them:  the finding  we  call  science,  the
importing – art, religion, love, pride.’
24
This conception of  meaning as endogenous – the  idea of
Man as the creator and generator of the meaning of his own
life  –  has  plainly  had  a  vast  influence  on  our  modern  and
postmodern  culture.  The  Nietzschean  vision  can  be  seen  as
having three phases. The first is the idea of the ‘death of God’,
which  appears  in  Die  Fröhliche  Wissenschaft  (The  Joyful  Science,
1882). A madman lights a lantern at midday and runs into the
market place crying that he seeks God. He is laughed at by the
atheists  who  are  standing  around:  ‘Did  he  get  lost?’,  they
sneer. ‘Or has he gone on a journey, or emigrated?’ At length
the madman announces ‘We have killed him, you and I!’ And
he goes off round the churches of the town to sing a requiem
– one that parodies the traditional text of the mass: instead of
a  prayer  for  God  to  grant  repose  to  the  dead,  it  becomes
‘requiem  eternam  Deo’  –  God  himself  is  consigned  to  eternal
rest.
25
Over a century later, the shock value of Nietzsche’s initial
proclamation  has  faded  a  little.  Walking  round  the  ancient
12

On
 the Meaning of Life

cities of Western Europe, where typically less than 10 per cent
of  the  people  now  attend  religious  services,  one  may  feel
like  echoing  the  madman’s  challenge:  ‘What  are  all  these
churches  now  if  they  are  not  the  tombs  and  sepulchres  of
God?’ The culture which once made religious observance so
central  –  in  the  rites  of  birth,  marriage  and  death,  in  the
celebration of the changing seasons of sowing and harvest, in
the weekly gatherings of the community Sunday after Sunday,
in the massive yearly solemnities of Nativity and Resurrection
each winter and spring – the culture underpinning all these
elaborate structures, if not quite extinct, seems in many places
to have either vanished, or be fast crumbling away.
But here the second phase of Nietzsche’s predictions comes
into play. Just as, after the Buddha was dead, ‘his tremendous,
gruesome shadow was still shown for centuries in a cave’, so,
after God is dead, ‘there may still be places for thousands of
years in which his shadow will be shown – and we still have
to vanquish the shadow’.
26
 Taking leave of God is not a simple
process,  like  abandoning  belief  in  phlogiston  once  a  better
scientific account of combustion comes along. Religious faith
does not form an isolated corner of our conceptual map that
can  be  torn  off  without  affecting  the  main  picture;  instead
(to  change  the  metaphor)  it  lies  at  the  centre  of  a  vast  web
of beliefs and attitudes and feelings that are all subtly inter-
connected. Unravelling them, and coming to terms with the
consequences  of  that  unravelling,  must  involve  a  radical
upheaval,  not  just  in  the  cognitive  sphere,  like  adjusting  or
modifying  a  scientific  hypothesis,  but  in  a  way  that  is  far
more primitive, implying a shift, often at a pre-rational level,
in  fundamental  aspects  of  our  moral,  social,  aesthetic  and
psychological  orientation  towards  reality.  Large  numbers  of
people  may  have  formally  abandoned  the  idea  of  God  as
13

The Question

central  to  their  world-view,  but  it  seems  that  for  relatively
few  does  this  feel  like  having  ‘arrived’;  many  instead  are
left  with  a  sense  of  vague  discomfort,  manifested  in  some
by  a  disquiet  about  the  moral  direction  of  a  wholly  secular
society,  in  others  by  intermittent  attraction  to  fashionable
alternative modes of spirituality, in others again by a certain
melancholic  nostalgia  for  the  nourishment  and  stability  of
the  faith  which  no  longer  seems  an  option.  In  Nietzsche’s
eyes,  it  is  as  if  mankind  has  acquired  a  debilitating  depen-
dency on the accumulated capital from its religious heritage,
and  learning  to  live  without  the  weekly  remittance  will  not
be  easy.  ‘Vanquishing  the  shadow’  requires  courage  and
determination.
Here emerges the third phase of the Nietzschean story. For
Nietzsche’s  vision  is  not  a  purely  destructive  one;  still  less
(like  the  brisk,  cheerful  atheism  purveyed  by  contemporary
secular apologists like Richard Dawkins)
27
 is it a plea to sweep
away  all  the  religious  rubble  with  the  vigorous  broom  of
science that is supposed to clean everything up. Instead, the
cry  of  the  madman  is  imbued  with  passionate  yearning,  a
fierce lament for the loss of ‘the holiest and most powerful of
all  that  the  world  has  yet  owned’,  and  a  determination  to
attempt the heroic task of constructing a human surrogate for
the defunct God. ‘Is not the greatness of this deed too great
for us? Must not we ourselves become gods simply to seem
worth of it?’
28
 Meaning, that vivid sense of purpose without
which  life  slides  into flatness  and  banality,  must  at  all  costs
be  recovered;  and  to  capture  this  Nietzsche  proposes  the
existential myth of the Eternal Recurrence:
This life as you now live it and have lived it you will have to
live once more and innumerable times more; and there will
14

On
 the Meaning of Life

be nothing new in it, but every pain and every joy and every
thought and sigh and everything unutterably small or great in
your life will have to return to you – and all in the same
succession and sequence – even this spider and this
moonlight between the trees, and even this moment and I
myself. The eternal hourglass of existence is turned over and
over, and you with it, a dust grain of dust.
29
It  is  not  that  the  envisaged  eternal  reiteration  would
somehow  bestow  objective  or  external  meaning  –  for  what
difference  could  unlimited  duration  or  endless  repetition
make to the significance of the spider I see in the moonlight?
We are indeed alone, in Nietzsche’s universe, thrown entirely
on our own resources, without any of what he regards as the
flabby comforts of religion designed to console the weak. The
darkness is all around us, and the only thing that can illumin-
ate it is our own indomitable will, a determination to say such
a  passionate  ‘Yes!’  to  each  single  existential  moment  of  life
that even on the condition of eternally repeating it we would
chose  no  other.  The  question  ‘Do  you  want  this  once  more
and  innumerable  times  more?’  would  ‘weigh  upon  your
actions  as  the  greatest  stress’,  to  be  overcome  only  by  an
affirmation so powerful that you would ‘crave nothing more
fervently than this ultimate confirmation and seal’.
30
Meaning, in Nietzsche’s vision, has to be generated entirely
from  the  inside.  The  world  we  have  to  inhabit  following
the  death  of  God  is  a  world  where,  in  the  poet  W.  B.  Yeats’
celebrated lines,
Whatever flames upon the night
Man’s own resinous heart has fed.
31
15

The Question

MAN, THE MEASURE OF ALL THINGS?
Man,  said  the  philosopher  Protagoras,  is  the  measure  of  all
things: of what is, that it is, and of what is not, that it is not.
32
Socrates had little trouble refuting that piece of pretentious-
ness. Pretentious it is, in its arrogance; the Psalmist’s cry ‘It is
He that hath made us and not we ourselves’,
33
 whatever one
may think of the underlying creed, at least has the humility to
acknowledge the basic truth that we exist in the universe as
wholly contingent beings, dependent on a reality we did not
create.  And  pretentious  too,  in  its  pseudo-profundity.  For
though Protagoras’ modern successors never tire of pointing
out that
there is nothing deep down inside us except what we have put
there ourselves, no criterion that we have not created in the
course of creating a practice, no standard of rationality that is
not an appeal to such a criterion, no rigorous argumentation
that is not obedience to our own conventions
34
the fact remains that none of these human procedures would
have  any  use  or  value  unless  they  were  confronted  by  an
independent  non-human  reality  that  in  the  long  run  allows
those procedures that are effective to flourish, and eradicates
those  that  are  faulty.  We,  mankind,  are  not  the  measure  of
whether  a  given  plant  does  well  in  a  given  soil,  or  a  given
engine  works  more  efficiently  than  another,  or  the  Earth
revolves annually around the Sun or vice versa. We create our
theories,  certainly,  but  we  can  only  delay,  never  ultimately
prevent, their collapse when they fail to measure up to the bar
of actual experience.
Of  course  there  is  a  residual  truth  behind  the  inflated
claims  of  Protagoras  and  his  more  sophisticated  modern
successors.  Since  we  cannot  jump  outside  of  our  human
16

On
 the Meaning of Life

culture, inspect reality ‘as it really is’, and then jump back and
pronounce such and such a theory true and another false, we
should  acknowledge  that  we  always  have  to  operate  within
the context of a continuing dialogue with our peers, with no
instant hotline to the truth, no privileged access to a Golden
Rule  or  Procedure  that  will  guarantee  that  our  hypotheses
fit reality. Yet to abandon the misguided hope for such guar-
antees should not lead us to forget that human science aims at
discovering  (or  eliminating)  realities  that  are  there  (or  not
there)  irrespective  of  anything  we  decide.  To  put  it  in  the
more  evocative  terminology  of  Yeats’  poem,  the  fuel  from
our  own  ‘resinous  hearts’  does  not  after  all  ‘feed’  reality:  it
illuminates, but  cannot  determine, what is there to be seen upon
the night.
How does this bear on Nietzsche’s heroic attempt to gener-
ate meaning from within? By supposing the unaided human
will can create meaning, that it can merely by its own resolute
affirmation  bypass  the  search  for  objectively  sourced  truth
and value, he seems to risk coming close to the Protagorean
fallacy.  For  meaning  and  worth  cannot  reside  in  raw  will
alone:  they  have  to  involve  a fit  between  our  decisions  and
beliefs  and  what  grounds  those  decisions  and  beliefs.  That
grounding  may,  as  some  religious  thinkers  maintain,  be
divinely  generated;  or  it  may  be  based  on  something  else  –
for  example  certain  fundamental  facts  about  our  social  or
biological  nature.  But  it  cannot  be  created  by  human fiat
alone.
The  Nietzschean  solution,  in  short,  is  untenable;  and  one
may add that it is in any case inhuman, or at least inhumane.
For a philosophy that exalts raw will as the key to value and
meaning,  that  makes  salvation  dependent  on  the  kind  of
heroic struggle, the greatest stress that can be endured only by
17

The Question

the strong, is not likely simultaneously to respect the claims of
the  tentative,  the  sceptical,  the  doubtful,  the  vacillating,  the
weak  and  the  helpless  –  all  those  who  are  ill-equipped  or
disinclined to ‘become gods’. Nietzsche, in the kind of rant
that  sporadically  mars  his  literary  and  philosophical  genius,
feverishly welcomed ‘the signs that a more manly, a warlike
age is about to begin, an age which above all will give honour
to  valour  once  again’.
35
  Over  a  century  of  dire  experience
later, it would be good to hope that mankind is increasingly
seeing  reason  to  prefer  the  more  mundane  virtues  of  com-
promise and compassion, the less heroic but more democratic
values rooted (historically) in the religious ethic of universal
brotherhood  that  Nietzsche  scorned.  But  this  postscript  on
Nietzsche will have to be left hanging for the moment, since
it  raises  general  issues  about  the  connection  between  the
quest for meaning and the foundations of morality that will
need more time to unravel.
VARIETY, MEANING AND EVALUATION
If human beings cannot create meaning and value merely by
an exercise of will, why can’t they nevertheless find meaning
in  the  various  diverse  human  activities  and  projects  they
undertake?  ‘Various’  and  ‘diverse’  are  the  key  words  here.
Perhaps  the  difficulty  in  the  question  that  baffled  the  Hitch
Hiker  philosophers  Loonquawl  and  Phouchg  was  that  they
were looking for the meaning – a single grand all-encompass-
ing answer. That, of course, is the way most religious thinkers
have  traditionally  seen  it.  But  perhaps  we  need  to  get  away
from  this  spell,  and  to  adopt  instead  a  more  modest,  piece-
meal approach, more in tune with the metaphysically lower-
key aspirations of what one might call contemporary secular
humanism. Perhaps, as Isaiah Berlin has neatly put it:
18

On
 the Meaning of Life

The conviction . . . that there exists . . . a discoverable goal, or
pattern of goals, the same for all mankind . . . is mistaken;
and so too is the notion that is bound up with it, of a single
true doctrine carrying salvation to all men everywhere’.
36
Consider  Alan,  a  golfer.  He  has  retired,  has  a  pension
sufficient  for  his  needs,  is  reasonably  healthy,  and  enjoys
above all his thrice-weekly game of golf. Let us assume that he
is  free  from  the  self-deception  and  social  manipulation  that
blight  the  lives  of  some  of  his  fellow  members  of  the  local
club: he is not there as a social climber, or to make business
contacts, or to show off his expensive golfclubs; he just genu-
inely  enjoys  the  game.  His  playing  gives  his  life  a  structure:
each week he looks forward to the coming games, and feels
satisfied  when  they  go  well.  Clearly  he  has  not  found  ‘The
Meaning of Life’, with capital letters. But why not say, quietly
and in lower-case letters, that he has succeeded in finding a
meaning,  or  some  meaning,  to  his  life;  and  that  this,  and
countless   similar   stories   for   countless   other   individuals
happily absorbed in their own favoured pursuits, amounts to
all that can be said, or needs to be said, on the matter?
Notice  that  to  reach  this  seemingly  modest  conclusion
certain things need to be assumed. We’ve stipulated that Alan
is comfortably off; and in this designation is included a whole
nest  of  assumptions  about  a  certain  easy flow  to  his  life,  an
absence of too much anxiety and constraint about day-to-day
living,  an  available  measure  of  free  time,  and  an  ability  to
exercise a degree of choice in the use of that time. We have
also stipulated that  he plays for the sheer  joy of the game –
uninfluenced    by    demeaning    motives    like    vain    self-
importance, or a desire to crawl to the boss; and there is a host
of further presuppositions here, this time about the extent to
19

The Question

which the chosen pursuit reflects Alan’s status as an autono-
mous agent. If he was playing out of abject fear of losing his
job, or because of a subconscious compulsion to surpass his
father’s  sporting  achievements,  then  we  would  be  more
doubtful in allowing he had found a meaning to his life – or
at  least  the  favourable  implications  of  that  phrase  would  be
put in question.
This last point brings out the fact that talk of ‘meaning’ in
life  is  inescapably  evaluative  talk.  To  describe  an  activity,  or
a  life,  as  meaningful  is  evidently  to  approve  or  commend
it.  Now  there  are  many  people  who  have  come  to  think  of
valuing as a matter of subjective preference; indeed, sentences
like  ‘That’s  just  a  value  judgement!’  are  often  used  to  mean
something like ‘That’s no more than your arbitrary personal
preference!’  But  in  fact,  although  there  may  be  some  things
we  just  arbitrarily  ‘take  a  fancy  to’,  without  any  objective
rhyme or reason,  typically we value things  in  virtue  of  objective
features  which  those  things  possess.  We  value  a  medicine
because of its curative properties; we value a piece of music
because it is uplifting, or relaxing, or beautifully harmonised;
we value a colleague because of her skill or good humour or
intelligence. In short, value is typically grounded not in arbitrary
preference but in objectively assessable features of the world.
And  characteristically,  our  value  terms  reflect  this  ‘ground-
ing’ by being what philosophers term ‘thick’ concepts: they
don’t  just  say,  thinly,  ‘wow,  that’s  good!’,  but  rather  they
carry,  packaged-in  with  them  so  to  speak,  those  factual
features in virtue of which we judge the object to be good.
37
Thus  concepts  like  ‘generous’  or  ‘courageous’  carry  with
them  a  package  or  checklist  of  qualifications  relevant  to  the
positive evaluation – courage has to do with standing firm in
the  face  of  danger,  generosity  with  a  certain  liberal  attitude
20

On
 the Meaning of Life

towards giving to others. Granted for the moment that ‘mean-
ingful’ is one of these thick concepts – and it certainly seems
to be, since to call a life meaningful is not just thinly to say
‘wow,  it’s  great!’  but  to  commend  it  in  virtue  of  some
specific  features  you  can  point  to  –  let  us  ask  what  is  the
package typically associated with this term.
WHAT MEANINGFULNESS IMPLIES
In  the first  place,  to  call  an  activity  or  a  life  meaningful
normally  implies  a  certain  profundity  or  seriousness  (though
‘serious’ here need not at all imply ‘solemn’). Pursuits can be
meaningful  in  a  more  or  less  deep  way,  but  not,  as  it  were,
in  a  shallow  way;  so  to  appraise  something  as  meaningful
excludes  its  being  trivial  or  silly.  Pastimes  like  golf  appear
somewhat  borderline  here:  it  seems  they  can  just  about
qualify as meaningful, but only provided they have a substan-
tial  and  important  recreational  function  (fostering,  perhaps,
a certain relaxation, harmony or expansiveness of spirit), or
else play some further role, for example by promoting health,
or  furthering  a  professional  sporting  career.  But  lining  up
balls of torn up newspaper in neat rows cannot normally be
meaningful (except in some special context – maybe it keeps
one sane in a prisoner-of-war camp). This links with a second
feature:  to  be  meaningful  an  activity  must  be  achievement-
oriented, that is, directed towards some goal, or requiring some
focus of energy or concentration or rhythm in its execution.
Aimlessly throwing darts without any attempt to keep score
or any concern for accuracy could not count as a meaningful
activity (again, in the absence of special circumstances).
Perhaps the most salient feature of meaningfulness derives
from  its  original  semantic  home  within  the  domain  of  lan-
guage. Meaningfulness is what might be called a hermeneutic
21

The Question

concept:  for  something  to  be  meaningful  to  a  agent,  that
agent must interpret it or construe it in a certain way. The words
of  a  marriage  ceremony  are  meaningful  because  they  are
construed by the parties as an exchange of promises; exercise
in the gym is meaningful because, rather than being an aim-
less  set  of  bodily  movements,  it  is  seen  as  a  programme
designed to improve cardiovascular fitness; thrusting a bunch
of flowers  in  someone’s  hand  is  meaningful  because  it  is
intended as an expression of romantic interest.
Extrapolating  from  these  examples  of  intentional  speech
and action, we may draw the further conclusion that mean-
ingfulness in action implies a certain degree of self-awareness or
transparency to the agent: for me to engage in a meaningful activity
I must have some grasp of what I am doing, and my interpret-
ation of it must reflect purposes of my own that are more or
less  transparent  to  me.  This  is  why  someone  who  is  in  the
grip  of  psychological  distortions  or  projections,  and  whose
goals  are  therefore  not  self-transparent,  risks  an  erosion  of
their  status  as  an  autonomous  agent  engaged  in  meaningful
activities.  Their  actions  –  the  obsessive  washing  of  a  table-
cloth, for instance – may have a deeper resonance that is not
properly  accessed  at  the  time,  so  that  the  agent’s  own  con-
scious  rationalisations  of  what  she  is  doing  (‘the  household
linen must be kept clean’) signally fail to justify the endless
relaundering of an already spotless cloth. Only when analysis
brings to the surface the true significance of the soiled linen
(in  Freud’s  famous  example,  the  repressed  memory  of  an
embarrassment suffered on the wedding night) is the subject
in a position to become self-aware of about her actions, and
to regain control of her life.
38
 Introducing convoluted cases of
this kind is not meant to suggest that all our actions have to be
subjected to minute psychoanalytic scrutiny before they meet
22

On
 the Meaning of Life

the transparency condition that allows us to be sure that the
way we view our actions does indeed correspond with their
true  significance.  But  it  is  none  the  less  undeniable  that  the
dynamics of human agency are often extremely complex, and
that  there  is  therefore  something  amiss  with  simplistic
accounts that blandly assure us the meaning of a life can be
read  off  as  a  straightforward  function  of  the  goals  that  an
agent consciously declares he has set himself to achieve or the
activities he has consciously elected to pursue.
Suppose,  however,  that  an  agent  is  fully  engaged,  in  a
self-aware  way,  undistorted  by  external  manipulation  or
unconscious projection, on systematic projects that reflect her
own  rational  choice  as  an  autonomous  agent.  Is  this  all  we
need to call their life meaningful? It may be so; but a problem
immediately arises that on this showing we could not avoid
calling  meaningful  the  life  of  a  dedicated  torturer,  working
devotedly  in  the  service  of  a  corrupt  regime.  Admittedly,
some of those who have reflected on this sort of case have had
no difficulty biting the bullet:
That immoral lives may be meaningful is shown by the
countless dedicated Nazi and Communist mass murderers
. . . and by people whose rage, resentment, greed, ambition,
selfishness and sense of superiority or inferiority give
meaning to their lives and lead them to inflict grievous
unjustified harm on others. Such people may be successfully
engaged in their projects, derive great satisfaction from
them, and find their lives . . . very meaningful.
39
They  may  perhaps  ‘find’  their  lives  meaningful,  but  are
such lives really meaningful? It would certainly not be a very
natural use of our language to bestow the epithet ‘meaningful’
on the life of the angry, resentful, greedy, ambitious, selfish
23

The Question

torturer.  But  perhaps  that  is  just  a  cosy  parochial  prejudice:
‘me  and  my  mates’  would  shrink  from  calling  such  a  life
meaningful, but that might be mere squeamishness, or else an
irrational hangover from an outmoded religious world-view
–  a  sentimental  wish  that  only  good  people  can find  real
meaning in their lives. Can a radically immoral life be really
meaningful?
MEANING AND MORALITY
We have already observed that the term ‘meaningful’ carries
with it a package of criteria for its appropriate use (there are
problems,  for  example,  in  describing  trivial  projects  or  the
projects of psychologically confused or unself-aware agents,
as  meaningful).  We  are  now  asking  whether  the  life  of  the
dedicated Nazi torturer can indeed qualify as meaningful, and
the only  way to answer this  is to unpack  the example more
carefully. If such a person is acting out of anger, resentment
or a sense of inferiority, for example, it already looks as if they
may  be  falling  short  of  the  autonomy  and  selfhood  that  is
necessary for us to say that their projects represent their own
unmanipulated choices about how best to live. A prostitute’s
life is not meaningful if her ‘choice’ to go on the streets is the
acting  out  of  pain  and  confusion  arising  from  her  being  a
victim  of  childhood  abuse.  The  life  of  the  bully  who  serves
the Nazis because he ‘derives great satisfaction’ from hurting
others begins to looks less meaningful when we explore the
background and find out that such satisfaction stems from a
damaged sense of self-worth produced by his upbringing at
the  hands  of  a  tyrannical  and  sadistic  father.  To  be  sure,  the
unhealthy choices and actions described in these sorts of case
have a certain sort of significance, just as the stunted growth
of a plant sown in polluted ground is significant – it points to
24

On
 the Meaning of Life

something that has gone awry. But it would be wrong to infer,
just because the agents find some kind of satisfaction in their
activities, that these lives qualify as meaningful in the richer
evaluative  sense  we  have  identified  as  belonging  to  the
package typically associated with the label ‘meaningful’ – the
sense  that  implies  an  agent’s  involvement  in  projects  that
reflect his or her free and autonomous choices.
But  could  there  not  be  a  completely  immoral  life  that
none  the  less  reflected  the  wholly  unmanipulated  rational
choices of the agent? Could not the rational immoralist – that
familiar figure  from  philosophical  discussions  of  the  old
question  ‘Why  should  one  be  moral?’  –  enjoy  a  perfectly
meaningful life? If we make the case one of excessive or per-
verted cruelty and inhumanity, then we may be drawn back
into  questions  about  the  psychological  equilibrium  of  the
agent; so let us stipulate instead that the immoralist we have in
mind  is  no  monster  of  vice,  nor  victim  of  gross  childhood
trauma,  but  is  instead  just  very,  very  selfish  –  and  selfish,
moreover, in a way that signally promotes his chosen projects.
He might be like Percy Berkeley, the gourmandising officer in
Simon Raven’s Alms for Oblivion sequence, who ‘had not had a
thought in his head for twenty years that was not connected
with his own immediate pleasure or comfort’.
40
 To make the
case  even  harder,  let  us  assume  that  the  chosen  projects  are
very much more impressive than the shallow indulgences of
the  bon  viveur,  amounting  instead  to  projects  of  great  cre-
ative significance. The much discussed case of Paul Gauguin,
who  selfishly  dumped  his  family  to  pursue  a  self-indulgent
but  highly  creative  life  in  Tahiti,  is  the  case  of  someone
now widely regarded as a painter of genius;
41
 and (our critic
might ask) if the life of an artistic genius is not meaningful,
whose is?
25

The Question

It would be hard to deny that achievements of a high cre-
ative order are naturally seen, both by the agents themselves
and by onlookers, as meaningful. What holds good for artistic
achievement  seems  to  hold  good  for  athletic,  technical  or
intellectual achievement: the great athlete, the brilliant engin-
eer or the gifted mathematician may all feel they have found
meaning  in  their  projects  and  achievements,  and  may  be
judged by those around them to lead meaningful lives. Yet in
none of these cases does it at first sight appear necessary that
the lives  in  question have  to be  morally decent  lives:  just as
the  artistic  genius  can  be  a  selfish  philanderer,  so  the  great
athlete could be a thug, the brilliant engineer a tax dodger, the
gifted mathematician a heartless miser, all apparently without
affecting  the  meaningfulness  of  their  lives,  so  judged.  This
brings  out  a  disturbing  feature  of  the  pluralistic  account  of
life’s meaning provided by the brand of secular humanism we
are considering. If there is no overarching structure or theory
that confers meaning on life, no normative pattern or model
to which the meaningful life must conform, then a meaning-
ful life reduces to little more than an engaged life in which
the  agent  is  systematically  committed  to  certain  projects  he
makes his own, irrespective of their moral status.
But  this  is  not  quite  good  enough.  It  is  not  as  if  we  are
speculating  in  a  vacuum  about  disembodied,  deracinated
beings who have a clean slate on which to devise the plan that
will confer meaning on their lives. We are talking about human
lives – the lives of a very special kind of animal, subject to an
array of interlinked imperatives – biological imperatives (for
food,  warmth,  shelter,  procreation),  social  imperatives  (the
need  to  cooperate,  the  drive  to  communicate),  emotional
imperatives (the need for such things as mutual recognition
and affection), and lastly and just as importantly what might
26

On
 the Meaning of Life

be called ‘rational imperatives’. Uniquely among known living
things  we  are  capable  of  standing  back  from  our  environ-
ment, questioning the way things are, challenging the actions
of our fellows, entering into dialogues of criticism and justifi-
cation. In the light of this complex context of interaction and
interpersonal dialogue within which we must live our lives,
there has to be something unstable about a compartmental-
ised vision in which individual pursuits and activities can be
thought of as bestowing meaning in isolation, irrespective of
their moral status, of how they impinge on others. Fulfilment
and  meaning  pursued  in  ways  that  involve  deceiving  or
hurting others, or making use of them as mere instrumental
fodder for one’s own success, closing one’s heart and mind to
the voice of one’s fellow creatures – these are modes of activ-
ity  that  make  one  less  human,  because  the  favoured  activities
have to be conducted at the cost of sealing off one’s rational
awareness and emotional sensibility so that one is no longer
open to such dialogue.
This  in  turn  suggests  that  to  pursue  meaning  in  these
inhuman ways risks being self-defeating. Unless the concen-
tration  camp  guard  proposes  to  turn  himself  into  nothing
more  than  a  machine  for  the  infliction  of  cruelty,  he  will
presumably need, if only in his off-duty hours, human con-
versation,  emotional  warmth,  the  cultivation  of  friendships,
family  ties  . . .  Furthermore,  since  the  sensibilities  required
for  such  human  pursuits  cannot  be  switched  on  and  off  at
will,  but  are  necessarily  a  matter  of  permanently  ingrained
dispositions  of  character,  the  gratification  our  guard  is  sup-
posed to be deriving from his gruesome work will inevitably
create  a  psychic  dissonance,  which  will  sooner  or  later  to
endanger  a  collapse  –  either  a  breakdown  of  his  ability  to
continue as a torturer or a breakdown of his ability to live a
27

The Question

fulfilling  home  life.  Of  course  it  is  (unhappily)  conceivable
that  a  job  that  involves  cruelty  and  bullying  may  produce
excitements  that  may  make  it  horribly  attractive  to  certain
individuals; that is not in dispute. The point is that it cannot,
for the reasons just given, constitute a coherent model for a
meaningful human life.
HUMANITY AND OPENNESS
The  factors  which  constrain  our  ability  as  humans  to find
meaning in our lives depend partly on our emotional make-up
and partly on our rational endowments. There is no need to
take  sides  here  in  an  artificial  philosopher’s  battle  between
David  Hume,  the  champion  of  sensibility  as  the  basis  of
morals,  and  Immanuel  Kant,  the  apostle  of  rationality.  Will
anyone  who  ‘wears  a  human  heart’,  asks  Hume,  ‘tread  as
willingly  on  another’s  gouty  toes,  whom  he  has  no  quarrel
with, as on the hard flint and pavement?’
42
 There is, on this
account, no plausible picture of a truly fulfilled human life cut
off  from  the  patterns  of  feeling  that  make  us  naturally  dis-
posed to have some minimal concern for our fellow creatures.
Can  I,  asks  Kant,  rationally  conceive  of  myself  as  worthy  of
respect, without recognising as a matter of reason that ‘every
other  rational  being  conceives  his  existence  on  the  same
rational  ground’?
43
  Legislating  a  privilege  for  oneself  which
one will not extend to others shows a defective rationality; for
to make use of others as a mere means to one’s selfish ends is
to cut oneself off from the operation of that rational dialogue
which  defines  our  humanity.  Those  determined  to  take
issue with these famous defences of morality could perhaps
produce  imaginary  (and  maybe  actual)  examples  of  people
who insist they have satisfying and meaningful lives despite
blocking  off  their  natural  sympathies  for  others,  or  despite
28

On
 the Meaning of Life

somehow  managing  to  insist  on  personal  privileges  they
refuse to consider extending to others. But there will always
be  a  certain  fragmentation  and  isolation  about  such  lives.
They cannot, by their very nature, flourish into lives that fully
embrace  our  human  potentialities  for  fellow  feeling  and
rational dialogue with others.
If  the  compartmentalised  life  is  less  than  fully  human,  it
follows that a truly meaningful life as a human being can be
achieved only by one whose pattern of living is in a certain
sense open rather than closed; that is, whose fundamental dis-
positions are structured is such a way as not to foreclose the
possibility  of  genuine  emotional  interaction  and  genuine
critical dialogue with their fellows. This need not mean that
in a meaningful life any moral value always has to override all
other  values:  perhaps  no  one  could  be  a  successful  artist  or
scientist  or  athlete  if  they  were  so  saintly  as  to  sacrifice  all
their  time  and  resources  to  the  needs  of  others.  But  it  does
mean that the meaningful life for human beings is an integrated
life – one where my pet projects and plans are not kept in an
isolated category which allows me to pursue them perpetu-
ally shielded from the demands on me as a parent, or a friend,
or a colleague, or a citizen. Though I may of course have my
own special priorities and goals – as I must do, if my life is to
be genuinely my own, if I am to be a human agent, not a mere
insect in the social hive –
44
 nevertheless the walls created by
those priorities will never become so thick as to allow me to
domineer like a tyrant within the domain of my own creative
self-importance.
So  what  of  the  Gauguin-type figure?  What  of  the  great
creator whose string of neglected families and discarded mis-
tresses and betrayed friends are regarded by him as walking
wounded,  casualties  in  the  all-consuming  struggles  of  a
29

The Question

genius?  Well,  it  would  be  naive  and  silly  to  deny  that  great
artists often behave badly. Both Tolstoy and Dickens, though
they  were  in  a  certain  sense  ‘family  men’,  could  in  some
respects be regarded as husbands from hell. The claim is not
that  a  meaningful  life  can  only  be  one  of  untiring  virtue:
lapses  and  failures  of  all  kinds  are  a  universal  feature  of  all
human lives, as prevalent among the great as they are among
the ordinary. Indeed, they may be more prevalent, since the
determination  required  to  excel  perhaps  needs  the  kind  of
single-mindedness that has a certain kinship to raw egoism.
But one can concede this obvious truth without succumbing
to  the  muddled  romantic  fantasy  that  greatness  somehow
requires or justifies callousness. All the evidence surely points
the  other  way;  for  great  art  is  great  precisely  because  of  its
humanity –  its  heightened  vision  of  the  pathos  and  tragedy
and comedy and precariousness of the human condition; and
it  verges  on  the  absurd  to  suggest  that  such  a  vision  is  best
cultivated through a coarsened and blunted sensitivity to the
needs of those fellow humans with whom one is most closely
involved. Further reflection along these lines suggests a seri-
ous  tension,  if  not  downright  incompatibility,  between  the
morally  insensitive  life  and  the  pursuit  of  artistic  creativity.
Artistic excellence does not after all operate in a compartment
sealed off from the deeper humanity of the artist. That open-
ness we have identified as central to a meaningful life will be
as much in point here as anywhere.
This chimes in with an old intuition of Aristotle – that the
virtues cannot be fully present in isolation, but are somehow
integrated or interconnected.
45
 And it accords with the idea to
be  found  in  many  religious  traditions  that,  in  order  to  be
meaningful,  life  must  meet  the  standards  of  some  pattern
tailored  to  our  human  nature,  rather  than  being  a  pure
30

On
 the Meaning of Life

function  of  isolated  individual  choice.  To  the  followers  of
Nietzsche, the champions of creativity and the lordship of the
will,  such  ideas  can  appear  restrictive  and  confining,  like  a
strait-jacket. But nothing about the idea of the meaningful life
as  integrated  presupposes  that  every  human  has  to  lead  the
same  kind  of  existence,  or  that  there  is  not  room  for  many
varieties of human flourishing – artistic, athletic, intellectual,
and so on. What is presupposed is that to count towards the
meaningfulness  of  a  life  these  varied  activities  have  to  be
more  than  just  performed  by  the  agent  with  an  eye  to  per-
sonal satisfaction; they have to be capable of being informed by
a  vision  of  their  value  in  the  whole,
46
  by  a  sense  of  the
worthwhile  part  they  play  in  the  growth  and flowering  of
each unique human individual, and of the other human lives
with which that story is necessarily interwoven.
The notions here may sound piously high-minded: moral,
perhaps  even  spiritual,  values  seem  to  be  being  invoked  as
touchstones  for  a  meaningful  life.  This  raises  the  question:
what can be the basis of such exalted conceptions of meaning
and value in a universe where, if current scientific orthodoxy
is correct, our entire human existence is not much more than
a random blip on the face of the cosmos? To that question we
now turn.
31

The Question

described as arising, in Kant’s phrase, from a ‘need of reason’.
58
According  to  Kant,  I  cannot  prove  (or  disprove)  God;  yet
because it would be humanly impossible to devote my life to
the good if I thought I was striving after ‘a conception which
at bottom was empty and had no object’, it is appropriate for
‘the  righteous  man  to  say  “I  will  that  there  be  a  God  . . .  I
firmly abide by this and will not let this faith be taken from
me”.’
The plea is for an acknowledgement that human beings, in
their  vulnerability  and finitude,  need,  in  order  to  survive,
modes of responding to the world which go beyond what is
disclosed in a rational scientific analysis of the relevant phe-
nomena.  Such  modes  of  response,  moreover,  are  character-
istically expressed through practices whose value and resonance
cannot be exhausted by a cognitive analysis of propositional
contents. Wittgenstein was fond of quoting Goethe’sIm Anfang
war die Tat –‘In the beginning was the Deed’. He also warned,
in  the  closing  sentence  of  his  early  masterpiece  the Tractatus,
that ‘what we cannot speak of we must pass over in silence’.
Altering  that final  phrase,  we  might  say  instead  that  the
domain that ‘cannot be spoken of ’ must be handled through praxis
– the practice of spirituality.
59
CODA: INTIMATIONS OF MEANING
The Corn was Orient and Immortal Wheat, which never should be
reaped nor was ever sown. I thought it had stood from everlasting to
everlasting. The Dust and Stones of the Street were as Precious as
GOLD . . . And yong Men Glittering and Sparkling Angels, and Maids
strange Seraphic Pieces of Light and Beauty! . . . Eternity was
Manifest in the Light of the Day and som thing infinit Behind evry
thing appeared: which talked with my Expectation and moved my
Desire.
Thomas Traherne
60
99
Meaning, Vulnerability and Hope

Instruction may make men learned, said Bernard of Clairvaux,
but  feeling  makes  them  wise.
61
  Learned  academics,  whose
livelihood   is   linked   to   displays   of   their   erudition   and
cleverness, may act as if all the questions of religion and the
meaning  of  life  could  be  answered  from  the  study  or  the
seminar room. But the illuminations that come from the prac-
tice  of  spirituality  cannot  be  accessed  by  means  of  rational
argument alone, since the relevant experiences are not avail-
able  to  us  during  those  times  when  we  are  adopting  the
stance of detached rationality.
To  access,  however,  is  not  the  same  as  to  assess.  Even  if
we  cannot  gain  access  to  spiritual  illumination  via  rational
analysis,  this  is  not  to  say  philosophy,  or  critical  rationality,
can have nothing to say about the quest for meaning via the
path of spirituality. For philosophy has an obligation to take
into account all experience that is part of the human condi-
tion.  And  although  claims  about  the  divine  may  lie  beyond
the horizon of scientific knowledge, it is not as if embarking
on  the  spiritual  quest  is  a  total  ‘leap  in  the  dark’.  For  our
human awareness, even of the everyday variety, indisputably
includes experiences in which spiritual values are made mani-
fest – experiences in which, arguably, we have intimations of
a transcendent world of meaning that breaks through into the
ordinary  world  of  our five  senses.  Our  apprehension  of
beauty,  the  beauty  of  the  natural  world,  is  one  example.  As
simple an experience as that of seeing the colours of the leaves
in autumn discloses the world around us as resonating with
an  astonishing  harmony  and  richness;  it  reveals  objects  as
qualitatively  irradiated  in  modalities  which  even  the  most
sober of analytic philosophers have agreed are not fully cap-
turable  in  the  language  of  physics.
62
  When  William  Blake
urged us ‘To see a World in a Grain of Sand and Heaven in a
100

On
 the Meaning of Life

Wild Flower’,
63
 he was not advocating some strange incoher-
ent mindset of the kind philosophers sometimes disparage by
using  the  label  ‘mystical’.  Rather,  he  was  pointing  to  some-
thing that few humans can honestly deny: our ability, in those
lucid  moments  that  Wordsworth  called  ‘spots  of  time’,
64
  to
see  the  world  transfigured  with  beauty  and  meaning.  There
is  a  clear  and  unbroken  continuum  from  our  immediate
everyday experience of the natural world, through the more
reflective poetic musings of Blake and Wordsworth, through
to  the  ecstatic  vision  of  Thomas  Traherne  quoted  above,  a
vision  in  which  the  wonder  and  preciousness  of  the  world,
and its human inhabitants, is so vividly manifest.
The  pervasive  modern  vision  of  the  cosmos  as  bleak  and
meaningless,  with  life  no  more  than  an  accidental  scum  on
the barren rocks, is a vision that is seen through the lens of
our own fouled-up lives – the empty concrete wastes of lit-
tered parking lots, the dirty, graffiti-defaced walls of decaying
warehouses and overcrowded office buildings. But take away
the grime our own greed has created, take away the perpetual
fog of exhaust fumes and the endless drone of jetliners rip-
ping up the ozone layer, the constant flickering of screens and
blaring  of  speakers.  Think  back  instead  only  two  or  three
centuries ago, to the limpid scenes captured by Canaletto, or
the translucent interiors of Vermeer, the pure air shimmering
and  sparkling,  the  colours  of  everyday  objects  bright  and
vivid and new. Think instead of Moses emerging from his tent
to gaze up at the brilliant canopy of blazing stars in the clear
night of the Sinai desert; the clean pure silence, the astonish-
ing  radiance  of  beauty.  That  is  our  world:  the  beauty  is  not
‘projected’  onto  it  by  the  observer,  but  is  inescapably  real,
calling forth an irresistible response in our hearts. We respond
to beauty, as we respond to truth and goodness: as objective
101

Meaning, Vulnerability and Hope

realities beyond ourselves, that have the power to inspire us
and draw us forward into the light. Of course it is possible, as
many philosophers since Hume have argued, that such object-
ivity  is  an  illusion,  resulting  from  the  mind’s  tendency  to
‘spread itself ’ or project its own feelings outwards onto the
world.
65
 But it is at least worth considering that talk of ‘projec-
tion’ may apply most aptly not to our natural joy and wonder at
the  immeasurable  beauty  of  the  natural  world  but  rather  to
the bleak modernistic vision of the universe as void of mean-
ing  and  value.  It  may  stem  from  our  own  confusions  and
bitterness as we wilfully turn away from the light, as we stead-
ily  advance  with  our  bulldozers  until  we  cover  the  whole
planet in concrete and then complain that the cosmos we live
in is no more than meaningless rubble.
Our aesthetic experience gives us intimations of a world of
value outside our own urgent self-oriented concerns. But to
call the wonder expressed in a vision like Traherne’s ‘aesthetic’
is  in  a  certain  sense  to  trivialise  it,  to  make  it  seem  like  the
precious  exclamations  of  an  effete  art  critic  showing  off  his
refinement in a picture gallery. In reality, aesthetic wonder is
also  suffused  with  a  moral  significance:  it  was  no  accident
that  Immanuel  Kant  linked  the  brilliancy  of  the  starry
heavens  above  with  the  moral  law  within,  as  the  two  most
awe-inspiring  objects  in  creation.
66
  What  is  manifest  in  the
beauty  of  the  people  who  walk  through  Traherne’s  corn-
fields,  the  young  men  who  are  ‘angels’  and  the  young
women who are ‘seraphic pieces of light and beauty’, is their
human  worth:  the  preciousness  of  individuals  who  are  vul-
nerable,  mortal,  and  yet  somehow  of  eternal  value,  since
their human lot of fragility and suffering has the capacity to
deepen  their  understanding  and  sympathy  – ‘that  one  poor
word  that  involves  all  our  best  insight  and  our  best  love’ –
102

On
 the Meaning of Life

and   ultimately,   mysteriously,   to   provide   the   grace   for
redemption and rebirth.
To see the world as Traherne saw it is not something that is
dictated by a scientific analysis of the given facts, yet neither is
it incompatible with those facts. The moral categories of our
experience,   so  closely   bound   up   with  the   question   of
life’s meaning, are not arcane or mystical categories, but are
inseparable  from  our  human  way  of  being  in  the  world.
Inseparable, but not automatically achieved. When things go
wrong,
Life’s but a fleeting shadow, a poor player
that struts and frets his hour upon the stage
and then is heard no more. It is a tale
told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
signifying . . . nothing.
67
Macbeth’s hell, his deep depression about his life and future,
is bound up with a vivid sense of the collapse of any meaning
in life. That in turn is triggered by his interior moral collapse,
his  capitulation  to  greed  and  ambition,  which  lets  him  take
the first step towards betrayal and murder: that capitulation,
which was supposed to give him the crown and solve all his
problems, turned out to be the first step to ethical disintegra-
tion,  the first  step  on  the  ‘primrose  path  to  the  everlasting
bonfire’.  Human  beings  cannot  live  wholly  and  healthily
except  in  responsiveness  to  objective  values  of  truth  and
beauty  and  goodness.  If  they  deny  those  values,  or  try  to
subordinate  them  to  their  own  selfish  ends,  they find  that
meaning slips away.
Perhaps  there  are  some  who  can  achieve  a  systematic
responsiveness to these values without the kind of focus pro-
vided  by  the  disciplines  of  spirituality;  but  the  argument  of
103

Meaning, Vulnerability and Hope

this book has been that such a ‘go it alone’ strategy is fraught
with  problems.  We  cannot  create  our  own  values,  and  we
cannot  achieve  meaning  just  by  inventing  goals  of  our
own; the fulfilment of our nature depends on the systematic
cultivation of our human capacities for wonder and delight in
the beauty of the world, and the development of our moral
sensibilities for compassion, sympathy and rational dialogue
with others. Yet, because of the fragility of our human condi-
tion,  we  need  more  than  a  rational  determination  to  orient
ourselves  towards  the  good.  We  need  to  be  sustained  by  a
faith in the ultimate resilience of the good; we need to live in
the  light  of  hope.
68
  Such  faith  and  hope,  like  the  love  that
inspires both, is not established within the domain of scien-
tifically determinate knowledge, but there is good reason to
believe it is available to us through cultivating the disciplines
of  spirituality.  Nothing  in  life  is  guaranteed,  but  if  the  path
we follow is integrally linked, as good spiritual paths are, to
right action and self-discovery and respect for others, then we
have little to lose; and if the claims of religion are true, then
we  have  everything  to  gain.  For  in  acting  as  if  life  has
meaning, we will find, thank God, that it does.
104

On
 the Meaning of Life
